The Knight’s Tale 

PART I 

STORIES of old have made it known to us 
That there was once a Duke called Theseus, 
Ruler of Athens, Lord and Governor, 
And in his time so great a conqueror 
There was none mightier beneath the sun. 
And many a rich country he had won, 
What with his wisdom and his troops of horse. 
He had subdued the Amazons by force 

And all their realm, once known as Scythia, 
But then called Femeny. Hippolyta, 
Their queen, he took to wife, and, says the story, 
He brought her home in solemn pomp and glory, 
Also her younger sister, Emily. 
And thus victorious and with minstrelsy 
I leave this noble Duke for Athens bound 
With all his host of men-at-arms around. 

And were it not too long to tell again 
I would have fully pictured the campaign 
In which his men-at-arms and he had won 
Those territories from the Amazon 
And the great battle that was given then 
Between those women and the Athenian men, 
Or told you how Hippolyta had been 
Besieged and taken, fair courageous queen, 
And what a feast there was when they were married, 
And after of the tempest that had harried 
Their home-coming. I pass these over now 
Having, God knows, a larger field to plough. 
Weak are my oxen for such mighty stuff; 
What I have yet to tell is long enough. 
I won’t delay the others of our rout, 
Let every fellow tell his tale about 
And see who wins the supper at the Inn. 
Where I left off, let me again beyin. 

This Duke I mentioned, ere alighting down 
And on the very outskirts of the town 
In all felicity and height of pride 
Became aware, casting an eye aside, 
That kneeling on the highway, two by two, 
A company of ladies were in view 
All clothed in black, each pair in proper station 
Behind the other. And such lamentation 
And cries they uttered, it was past conceiving 
The world had ever heard such noise of grieving, 
Nor did they hold their misery in check 
Till they grasped bridle at his horse’s neck, 

‘Who may you be that, at my coming, so 
Perturb my festival with cries of woe ?’ 
Said Theseus. ‘Do you grudge the celebration 
Of these my honours with your lamentation ? 
Who can have injured you or who offended ? 
And tell me if the matter may be mended 
And why it is that you are clothed in black ?’ 
The eldest of these ladies answered back, 
Fainting a little in such deadly fashion 
That but to see and hear her stirred compassion, 
And said, ‘O Sir, whom Fortune has made glorious 
In conquest and is sending home victorious, 
We do not grudge your glory in our grief 
But rather beg your mercy and relief. 
Have pity on our sorrowful distress! 
Some drop of pity, in your nobleness, 
On us unhappy women let there fall! 
For sure there is not one among us ail 
That was not once a duchess or a queen, 
Though wretches now, as may be truly seen, 
Thanks be to Fortune and her treacherous wheel 
That suffers no estate on earth to feel 
Secure, and, waiting on your presence, we, 
Here at the shrine of Goddess Clemency, 
Have watched a fortnight for this very hour. 
Help us, my Lord, it lies within your power. 
I, wretched Queen, that weep aloud my woe, 
Was wife to King Capaneus long ago 
That died at Thebes, accursed be the day! 
And we in our disconsolate array 
That make this sorrowful appeal to pity 
Lost each her husband in that fatal city 
During the siege, for so 1t came to pass. 
Now old King Creon — O alas, alas! — 
The Lord of Thebes, grown cruel in his age 
And filled with foul iniquity and rage, 
For tyranny and spite as I have said 
Does outrage on the bodies of our dead, 

On all our husbands, for when they were slain 
Their bodies were dragged out onto the plain 
Into a heap, and there, as we have learnt, 
They neither may have burial nor be burnt, 
But he makes dogs devour them, in scorn.’ 
At that they all at once began to mourn, 
And every woman fell upon her face 
And cried, ‘Have pity, Lord, on our disgrace 
And let our sorrow sink into your heart.’ 

The Duke, who felt a pang of pity start 
At what they spoke, dismounted from his steed; 
He felt his heart about to break indeed, 
Seeing how piteous and disconsolate 
They were, that once had been of high estate! 
He raised them in his arms and sought to fill 
Their hearts with comfort and with kind good will, 
And swore on oath that as he was true knight, 
So far as it should lie within his might, 

He would take vengeance on this tyrant King, 
This Creon, till the land of Greece should ring 
With how he had encountered him and served 
The monster with the death he had deserved. 
Instantly then and with no more delay, 

He turned and with his banners in display 
Made off for Thebes with all his host beside, 
For not a step to Athens would he ride, 

Nor take his ease so much as half a day, 
But marched into the night upon his way. 
But yet he sent Hippolyta the Queen 
And Emily her sister, the serene, 
On into Athens, where they were to dwell, 
And off he rode; there is no more to tell. 

The figure of red Mars with spear and targe 
So shone upon his banners white and large, 
That all the meadows glittered up and down, 
And close by them his pennon of renown 
Shone rich with gold, emblazoned with that feat, 
His slaying of the Minotaur in Crete. 

Thus rode this Duke, thus rode this conqueror 
And led his flower of chivalry to war, 
Until he came to Thebes, there to alight 
In splendour on a chosen field to fight. 
And, to speak briefly of so great a thing, 
He conquered Creon there, the Theban king, 
And slew him manfully, as became a knight, 
In open battle, put his troops to flight, 
And by assault captured the city after 
And rent it, roof and wall and spar and rafter; 
And to the ladies he restored again 
The bones belonging to their husbands slain, 
To do, as custom was, their obsequies. 
But it were all too long to speak of these, 
Or of the clamorous complaint and yearning 
These ladies uttered at the place of burning 
The bodies, or of all the courtesy 
That Theseus, noble in his victory, 
Showed to the ladies when they went their way; 
I would be brief in what I have to say. 
Now when Duke Theseus worthily had done 
Justice on Creon and when Thebes was won, 
That night, camped in the field, he took his rest, 
Having disposed the land as he thought best. 

Crawling fer ransack among heaps of slain 
And stripping their accoutrements for gain, 
The pillagers went busily about 
After the battle on the field of rout. 

And so befell among the heaps they found, 
Thrust through with bloody wounds upon the ground, 
Two pale young knights there, lying side by side, 
Wearing the self-same arms in blazoned pride. 
Of these Arcita was the name of one, 
That of the other knight was Palamon; 
And they were neither fully quick nor dead. 
By coat of arms and crest upon the head 
The heralds knew, for all the filth and mud, 
That they were Princes of the Royal Blood; 

Two sisters of the House of Thebes had borne them. 
Out of the heap these pillagers have torn them 
And gently carried them to Theseus’ tent. 
And he decreed they should at once be sent 
To Athens, and gave order they be kept 
Perpetual prisoners — he would accept 
No ransom for them. This was done, and then 
The noble Duke turned homeward with his men 
Crowned with the laurel of his victory, 
And there in honour and felicity 
He lived his life; what more is there to say 
And in a tower, in grief and anguish lay 
Arcite and Palamon, beyond all doubt 
For ever, for no gold could buy them out. 

Year after year went by, day after day, 
Until one morning in the month of May 
Young Emily, that fairer was of mien 
Than is the lily on its stalk of green, 
And fresher in her colouring that strove 
With early roses in a May-time grove 
— I know not which was fairer of the two — 
Ere it was day, as she was wont to do, 
Rose and arrayed her beauty as was right, 
For May will have no sluggardry at night, 
Season that pricks in every gentle heart, 
Awaking it from sleep, and bids it start, 
Saying, ‘Arise! Do thine observance due!’ 
And this made Emily recall anew 
The honour due to May and she arose, 
Her beauties freshly clad. To speak of those, 
Her yellow hair was braided in a tress 
Behind her back, a yard in length, I guess, 
And in the garden at the sun’s uprising, 
Hither and thither at her own devising, 
She wandered gathering flowers, white and red, 
To make a subtle garland for her head, 
And like an angel sang a heavenly song. 
The great, grim tower-keep, so thick and strong, 

Principal dungeon at the castle’s core 
- Where the two knights, of whom I spoke before 
And shall again, were shut, if you recall, 
Was close-adjoining to the garden wall 
Where Emily chose her pleasures and adornings. 
Bright was the sun this loveliest of mornings 
And the sad prisoner Palamon had risen, 
With licence from the jailer of the prison, 
As was his wont, and roamed a chamber high 
Above the city, whence he could descry 
The noble buildings and the branching green 
Where Emily the radiant and serene 
Went pausing in her walk and roaming on. 

This sorrowful prisoner, this Paiamon, 
Was pacing round his chamber to and fro 
Lamenting to himself in all his woe. 
‘Alas,’ he said, ‘that ever I was born!’ 
And so it happened on this May day morn, 
Through a deep window set with many bars 
Of mighty iron squared with massive spars, 
He chanced on Emily to cast his eye 
And, as he did, he blenched and gave a cry 
As though he had been stabbed, and to the heart. 
And, at the cry, Arcita gave a start 
And said, ‘My cousin Palamon, what ails you ? 
How deadly pale you look! Your colour fails you! 
Why did you cry? Who can have given offence ? 
For God’s love, take things patiently, have sense, 
Think! We are prisoners and shall always be. 
Fortune has given us this adversity, 
Some wicked planetary dispensation, 
Some Saturn’s trick or evil constellation 
Has given us this, and Heaven, though we had sworn 
The contrary, so stood when we were born. 
We must endure it, that’s the long and short.’ 

And Palamon in answer made retort, 
‘Cousin, believe me, your opinion springs 
From ignorance and vain imaginings. 
