The Knight’s Tale 

PART I 

STORIES of old have made it known to us 
That there was once a Duke called Theseus, 
Ruler of Athens, Lord and Governor, 
And in his time so great a conqueror 
There was none mightier beneath the sun. 
And many a rich country he had won, 
What with his wisdom and his troops of horse. 
He had subdued the Amazons by force 

And all their realm, once known as Scythia, 
But then called Femeny. Hippolyta, 
Their queen, he took to wife, and, says the story, 
He brought her home in solemn pomp and glory, 
Also her younger sister, Emily. 
And thus victorious and with minstrelsy 
I leave this noble Duke for Athens bound 
With all his host of men-at-arms around. 

And were it not too long to tell again 
I would have fully pictured the campaign 
In which his men-at-arms and he had won 
Those territories from the Amazon 
And the great battle that was given then 
Between those women and the Athenian men, 
Or told you how Hippolyta had been 
Besieged and taken, fair courageous queen, 
And what a feast there was when they were married, 
And after of the tempest that had harried 
Their home-coming. I pass these over now 
Having, God knows, a larger field to plough. 
Weak are my oxen for such mighty stuff; 
What I have yet to tell is long enough. 
I won’t delay the others of our rout, 
Let every fellow tell his tale about 
And see who wins the supper at the Inn. 
Where I left off, let me again beyin. 

This Duke I mentioned, ere alighting down 
And on the very outskirts of the town 
In all felicity and height of pride 
Became aware, casting an eye aside, 
That kneeling on the highway, two by two, 
A company of ladies were in view 
All clothed in black, each pair in proper station 
Behind the other. And such lamentation 
And cries they uttered, it was past conceiving 
The world had ever heard such noise of grieving, 
Nor did they hold their misery in check 
Till they grasped bridle at his horse’s neck, 

‘Who may you be that, at my coming, so 
Perturb my festival with cries of woe ?’ 
Said Theseus. ‘Do you grudge the celebration 
Of these my honours with your lamentation ? 
Who can have injured you or who offended ? 
And tell me if the matter may be mended 
And why it is that you are clothed in black ?’ 
The eldest of these ladies answered back, 
Fainting a little in such deadly fashion 
That but to see and hear her stirred compassion, 
And said, ‘O Sir, whom Fortune has made glorious 
In conquest and is sending home victorious, 
We do not grudge your glory in our grief 
But rather beg your mercy and relief. 
Have pity on our sorrowful distress! 
Some drop of pity, in your nobleness, 
On us unhappy women let there fall! 
For sure there is not one among us ail 
That was not once a duchess or a queen, 
Though wretches now, as may be truly seen, 
Thanks be to Fortune and her treacherous wheel 
That suffers no estate on earth to feel 
Secure, and, waiting on your presence, we, 
Here at the shrine of Goddess Clemency, 
Have watched a fortnight for this very hour. 
Help us, my Lord, it lies within your power. 
I, wretched Queen, that weep aloud my woe, 
Was wife to King Capaneus long ago 
That died at Thebes, accursed be the day! 
And we in our disconsolate array 
That make this sorrowful appeal to pity 
Lost each her husband in that fatal city 
During the siege, for so 1t came to pass. 
Now old King Creon — O alas, alas! — 
The Lord of Thebes, grown cruel in his age 
And filled with foul iniquity and rage, 
For tyranny and spite as I have said 
Does outrage on the bodies of our dead, 

On all our husbands, for when they were slain 
Their bodies were dragged out onto the plain 
Into a heap, and there, as we have learnt, 
They neither may have burial nor be burnt, 
But he makes dogs devour them, in scorn.’ 
At that they all at once began to mourn, 
And every woman fell upon her face 
And cried, ‘Have pity, Lord, on our disgrace 
And let our sorrow sink into your heart.’ 
